---
title: RESEARCH PROPOSAL COMPETITION SUBMISSION - IEEE
date: 2021-06-14T18:30:00+00:00
image_webp: "/images/ieee.webp"
image: "/images/ieee.jpg"
author: Arish Naim & Saad Mohammad
description: This is meta description
draft: true

---
**RESEARCH PROPOSAL COMPETITION SUBMISSION**

Team Number – **4**

Research Theme – **SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT**

**Bio-based material for Carbon Capture through Voltage Oscillations**

**Introduction :** One of the major contributors towards the rapid rise in CO2 concentration in the atmosphere are the automobiles. Around 15% of the total CO2 emission is accounted for by road transport (cars and buses) in the world (Our world data 2020).\[4\] Most of the world's leading countries have already resolved to reduce carbon emissions in compliance with the Paris agreement which was discussed in the recent Climate Change summit 2021. India takes third position in the list of top CO2 emission countries in the world. Placing a material in the exhaust of the automobile engine that could filter and reduce emissions of CO2. However, filters can act as obstruction in the flow from the engine thereby affecting the fuel/air ratio and the requirement of replacement of these filters after a few kilometers is another hurdle that stymies this idea to become the next most reliable carbon emission reduction business technology. This research would adopt a sustainable technology and pathway to address the current climatic change problem and reduce the emissions of CO2

A recent technology introduced by researchers at MIT named Faradaic electro swing reaction adsorption system using a polyanthroquinone-CNT based electrode coating would be taken as the base technology. The idea behind this research proposal is to limit the CO2 emission from automobiles by developing a quinone-bio based (replacing CNT) composite nanomaterial to serve as the exhaust pipe inner lining in the automobile engine. The above mentioned nanomaterial composite would selectively absorb CO2 from the stream of gases. The material is activated due to the potential difference, which would be generated by car engine only, activating it to adsorb CO2 and later desorb it upon change of potential. Since the temperature and pressure of the electrode chamber remains the same throughout, the material shows high efficiency even after at least 7000 cycles.

**Background: The increasing CO2 levels in the atmosphere**

1. Existing technologies & Challenges

Several technological options, physical as well as chemical are available to separate CO2 from a stream of gas. The following table covers the major existing CCS technologies:

| --- | --- | --- |
| Technology | Advantage | Challenges & Disadvantages |
| Absorption | Well established and easily available | High water and solvent requirement; fossil fuel consumption |
| Adsorption(using zeolites, activated Carbon, etc) | Relatively lower energy requirement | Increased fossil fuel combustion, disposal of spent materials |
| Cryogenic | Lower energy requirement | Handling of solid CO2, Increased fossil fuel combustion |
| Membranes | Avoids regeneration energy requirements | Permeability, selectivity, Increased fossil fuel combustion |
| Mineralization | Solid Substrate of CO2 can be used as a building material or disposed in surface facilities | Increased fossil fuel combustion, Disposal of materials could be problematic, Impact of mining of minerals on the environment |

2. Proposed solution :

The proposed design includes a Carbon - Capture device that is essentially a large, specialized battery. The CO2 capture takes place through ‘adsorption’ over the ‘quinone’ electrodes with Carbon Nanotubes as the electrode material or alternatively ‘Nano-cellulose’ electrodes as an eco-friendly variant. The many tiny electrodes are made to absorb and release CO2 through a charging and a discharging cycle.The quinone and the ferrocene electrodes are connected via a power source. During the charging cycle, electrons flow from ferrocene to the quinone through the wires. The quinone is now negatively charged. When CO2-containing air or exhaust is blown past these electrodes, the quinone will capture the CO2 molecules until all the active sites on its surface are filled up. During the discharge cycle, the direction of the voltage on the cell is reversed, and electrons flow from the quinone back to the ferrocene. The quinone is no longer negatively charged, so it has no chemical affinity for CO2. The CO2 molecules are released and swept out of the system by a stream of purge gas for subsequent use or disposal. The quinone is now regenerated and ready to capture more CO2.

It is clear from the table given above that nearly all the existing technologies suffer from the drawback of fossil fuel combustion. In contrast, our design runs on electricity that could be generated through renewable sources.

It has several advantages over many conventional designs such as being more energy efficient, pure CO2 release but the most prominent advantage is its binary nature. The electrodes have a high affinity for CO2 in the airstream or feed gas during the charging cycle when the quinone is forced to take extra electrons and it is activated. On the other hand, during the discharging cycle, the battery is deactivated and the electrodes lose their affinity for CO2.

Adsorption of Carbon Dioxide on quinones can also be done by varying the temperature and pressure but in this design, we make use of electricity to provide small swings in voltages of the electrodes and reverse its polarity for Carbon-Capture.

This also makes the device highly energy efficient. In an estimate, 1GJ of energy is spent in capturing over 1 metric tonne of Carbon Dioxide. For perspective, according to a survey done by the US Energy Information Administration, an average US household, as of 2015 consumes over 38GJ of energy annually.

The released CO2 can be stored to be disposed of safely or converted into fuel. It could also be used in other industries such as production of soft drinks or farming.

This material and technology is cost effective and has the potential to surpass the current carbon capture Storage (CCS) technology. While existing technologies can take at least 60$ for a tonne of CO2 captured\[7\], the CCS based on quinone electrodes cost as little as 34$ for the same amount\[6\]. The existing technologies suffer from the drawbacks of high energy consumption along with high cost of the setup. While this material can work even at concentrations as low as 0.6% that are present in ambient conditions. It shows higher efficiency, the electrodes have shown less than 30% loss of adsorption capacity even after 7000 cycles and faradaic efficiency is 90%.

This bio based quinone composite material can be environmentally benign as compared to CNT based anthraquinone composite coating given by MIT researchers.

3. Research Plan/Methodology

**Methodology-** The research is based on the global issue of climate change due to CO2 emissions. The solution proposed is to limit the emissions at point source such as automobiles by using the electro-swing adsorption method. We intend to introduce a novel biobased nanomaterial, nanocellulose as the surface on which the quinone-ferrocene polymer would be coated. Nanocellulose is environmentally benign and can be prepared via a cost effective protocol along with rendering good conductivity and high mechanical strength to work as a strong substrate for the polymer of quinone-ferrocene to wrap around and transport the electrons in and out of the quinone-ferrocene.

The adsorption mechanism is based on varying the electric charge. The change in voltage activates and deactivates the quinone for adsorption and desorption respectively thereby allowing sequestration of CO2 from the stream of gas. The source of power in our experiment would be the automobile, wherein the automobile engine would provide the electrical voltage when it is turned on and withdrawal of the power would occur when the engine would be shut down.

We plan to develop a material which is completely sustainable and environment friendly, thereby eliminating the need of Carbon Nanotubes in the current technology of electro-swing cells. The research experiment would have a facile protocol to synthesize nanocellulose and the polyanthroquinone-ferrocene polymer. The polymer would serve as the electrodes similar to as used in the existing electro-swing cells but placed on nanocellulose as the conduit for electron transport between the quinone and ferrocene. The said material would be used in the lining inside the exhaust pipe automobiles where they will work for CO2 sequestration.

**Milestone-**

1. Synthesis of Nanocellulose and quinone-ferrocene polymer through a green pathway
2. Testing of the material to work on the electro-swing concept at lab scale
3. Testing by installing the product in a real automobile engine.

**Conclusion:**

The concept of electro-swing adsorption by quinone is feasible and sustainable technology as this material can be reused and would be cost effective as compared to the existing technologies of carbon capturing. Proposed research is based on a sustainable natural polymer and primarily focuses on the application of this technology in automobiles which later could be extended to industrial exhaust systems. The research study would explore the possibilities of using this material in the automobile exhaust pipe as the inner lining and operate through the potential generated by the automobile engine itself. The energy required to run the charging and discharging cycles is obtained through renewable sources instead of fossil fuels. This material would be prepared through an eco-friendly protocol and ensuring utilisation of non-toxic components in the experiment such as nanocellulose in place of Carbon Nanotube. Through this research we plan to meet some of the critical impacts of CO2 emission and challenges related to carbon capture technology.

**References:**

**\[1\]**[**10 Carbon Capture methods compared: costs, scalability, permanence, cleanness - Energy Post**](https://energypost.eu/10-carbon-capture-methods-compared-costs-scalability-permanence-cleanness/)

**\[2\]**[**Carbon Capture, Usage and Storage (CCUS): what, why, how? | Energy & Climate Intelligence Unit (eciu.net)**](https://eciu.net/analysis/briefings/net-zero/carbon-capture-usage-and-storage-ccus-what-why-how)

**\[3\]file:///C:/Users/user/Downloads/nanomaterials-10-00186-v2.pdf**

**\[4\]**[**https://ourworldindata.org/co2-emissions-from-transport#:\~:text=Transport%20accounts%20for%20around%20one,CO2%20emissions%20from%20energy%5D.&text=Road%20travel%20accounts%20for%20three,buses%20%E2%80%93%20which%20contribute%2045.1%25**](https://ourworldindata.org/co2-emissions-from-transport#:\~:text=Transport%20accounts%20for%20around%20one,CO2%20emissions%20from%20energy%5D.&text=Road%20travel%20accounts%20for%20three,buses%20%E2%80%93%20which%20contribute%2045.1%25 "https://ourworldindata.org/co2-emissions-from-transport#:~:text=Transport%20accounts%20for%20around%20one,CO2%20emissions%20from%20energy%5D.&text=Road%20travel%20accounts%20for%20three,buses%20%E2%80%93%20which%20contribute%2045.1%25")**.**

**\[5\]**[**Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage: Issues and Prospects | Annual Review of Environment and Resources (annualreviews.org)**](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/full/10.1146/annurev-environ-032112-095222)

**\[6\]**[**MIT engineers develop a new way to remove carbon dioxide from air | MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology**](https://news.mit.edu/2019/mit-engineers-develop-new-way-remove-carbon-dioxide-air-1025)

**\[7\]**[**Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage: Issues and Prospects | Annual Review of Environment and Resources (annualreviews.org)**](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/full/10.1146/annurev-environ-032112-095222#)